JEP 372: Remove the Nashorn JavaScript Engine
======================================================================

| Owner | Jim Laskey | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | JDK | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 15 | 
| Component | core-libs / jdk.nashorn | 
| Discussion | jdk dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | M | 
| Duration | M | 
| Relates to | JEP 335: Deprecate the Nashorn JavaScript Engine for Removal](335) | 
| Reviewed by | Hannes Wallnoefer, Sundararajan Athijegannathan | 
| Endorsed by | Mark Reinhold | 
| Created | 2020/01/10 14:29 | 
| Updated | 2025/10/21 12:45 | 
| Issue | 8236933](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8236933) | 

## Summary

Remove the Nashorn JavaScript script engine and APIs, and the`jjs`tool. The engine, the APIs, and the tool weredeprecated for removal in Java 11](http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/335)with the express intent to remove them in a future release.

## Motivation

The Nashorn JavaScript engine was first incorporated into JDK 8 viaJEP 174](http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/174)as a replacement for the Rhino scripting engine. When it was released, it was a complete implementation of the ECMAScript-262 5.1 standard.

With the rapid pace at which ECMAScript language constructs, along with APIs, are adapted and modified, we have found Nashorn challenging to maintain.

## Non-Goals

This removal does not affect, in any way, the`javax.script`API.

## Description

TwoJDK modules](http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/200#Design-principles)will be permanently removed:

- 
`jdk.scripting.nashorn`-- contains the`jdk.nashorn.api.scripting`and`jdk.nashorn.api.tree`packages.

- 
`jdk.scripting.nashorn.shell`-- contains the`jjs`tool.

## Risks and Assumptions

We assume that developers who rely on Nashorn have had enough notice of its proposed removal to make alternative arrangements. The deprecation-for-removal of Nashorn in JDK 11 was confirmed in June 2018, causing the proposed removal to be flagged at every use of the`jdk.nashorn.*`API and the`jjs`tool in JDK 11, 12, and 13. During this period, no set of credible developers expressed a clear desire to maintain Nashorn in JDK 14 and beyond.