JEP 106: Add Javadoc to javax.tools
======================================================================

| Owner | Jonathan Gibbons | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | SE | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 8 | 
| Component | tools / javadoc(tool) | 
| JSR | 199 MR](https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=199) | 
| Discussion | compiler dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | S | 
| Duration | S | 
| Endorsed by | Brian Goetz | 
| Created | 2011/07/21 20:00 | 
| Updated | 2015/02/13 19:41 | 
| Issue | 8046096](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8046096) | 

## Summary

Extend the`javax.tools`API to provide access to javadoc.

## Motivation

It is increasingly common to want to invoke tools via an API, as part of a larger software environment, instead of by exec-ing a new process. This provides improved performance by avoiding the need to start additional JVMs, and by providing an API for more type-safe invocation.

## Description

The API changes are relatively small, but the implementation behind the new methods involves some amount of refactoring the existing implementation. The primary task is to change all existing uses of`java.io.File`into corresponding uses of`javax.tools.FileObject`. Much of this work has already been done in JDK 7, but the remaining work has had to be deferred because of a probably dependence on the new NIO API.

## Testing

Unit (jtreg) tests will be provided to exercise the new functionality. There will not be any platform-specific requirements.

## Risks and Assumptions

Generally speaking, javadoc is very old code, that has not had much TLC in a long time. There is a risk that the refactoring will not be as simple as expected.

## Dependences

Up to now, there has been a probable dependence on the new NIO API, but that has now become available in JDK 7.

## Impact

- JCP: maintenance review of JSR 199
- Compatibility: minimal
- Documentation: API docs only
- Internationalization: minimal
- Localization: minimal