JEP 298: Remove Demos and Samples
======================================================================

| Author | shurailine | 
| Owner | Aleksandre Iline | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | JDK | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 9 | 
| Component | infrastructure | 
| Discussion | jdk9 dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | M | 
| Duration | L | 
| Reviewed by | Mikael Vidstedt, Philip Race, Stuart Marks, Yuri Nesterenko | 
| Created | 2016/08/25 18:11 | 
| Updated | 2017/05/08 23:47 | 
| Issue | 8164813](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8164813) | 

## Summary

Remove the outdated and unmaintained demos and samples.

## Non-Goals

It is not a goal to create new or replacement demos and samples.

## Motivation

Most of the existing demos and samples in`jdk/src/demo`and`jdk/src/sample`are out of date and unmaintained, and thus no longer useful either to developers working on the JDK itself or to the broader Java community. Their source code no longer represents state-of-the-art usage of the Java programming language and the Java SE Platform, and there are no plans to update them. Better sample code is available from many other sources, for example in the many articles, books, and presentations published in the broader community.

## Description

A few demos are used for testing, and thus will be moved to an appropriate location in the`test`hierarchy of the`jdk`repository:

- `demo/share/applets`
- `demo/share/java2d`
- `demo/share/jfc`

The remaining demos and samples will be removed from the`jdk`repository:

- `demo/share/jvmti`
- `demo/share/management`
- `demo/share/nbproject`
- `demo/share/scripting`
- `demo/solaris/jni`
- `sample/share/annotations`
- `sample/share/forkjoin`
- `sample/share/jmx`
- `sample/share/lambda`
- `sample/share/nio`
- `sample/share/scripting`
- `sample/share/try-with-resources`
- `sample/share/vm`
- `sample/solaris/dtrace`

Corresponding makefile changes will be made. Built JDK images will no longer contain`demo`or`sample`directories.

## Alternatives

If there is strong demand then the source to be removed could be published in a separate repository outside of any JDK Release Project, though in any case it will always be available in the Mercurial history of the`jdk`repository.