JEP 493: Linking Run-Time Images without JMODs
======================================================================

| Owner | Severin Gehwolf | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | JDK | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 24 | 
| Component | tools / jlink | 
| Discussion | core dash libs dash dev at openjdk dot org, jigsaw dash dev at openjdk dot org | 
| Effort | M | 
| Duration | M | 
| Reviewed by | Alan Bateman, Mandy Chung | 
| Endorsed by | Alan Bateman | 
| Created | 2024/06/07 13:36 | 
| Updated | 2025/02/20 09:55 | 
| Issue | 8333799](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8333799) | 

## Summary

Reduce the size of the JDK by approximately 25% by enabling the`jlink`tool to create custom run-time images without using the JDK's JMOD files. This feature must be enabled when the JDK is built; it will not be enabled by default, and some JDK vendors may choose not to enable it.

## Goals

Allow users to link a run-time image from modules regardless of whether those modules are standaloneJMOD files](https://openjdk.org/jeps/261#Packaging:-JMOD-files),modular JAR files](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/23/docs/specs/jar/jar.html#modular-jar-files), or are part of a run-time image linked previously.

## Motivation

The installed size of the JDK on the filesystem is important in cloud environments, where container images that include an installed JDK are automatically and frequently copied over the network from container registries. Reducing the size of the JDK would improve the efficiency of these operations.

A complete, installed JDK has two main components: A*run-time image*, which is the executable Java run-time system, and a set of*packaged modules*, in theJMOD format](https://openjdk.org/jeps/261#Packaging:-JMOD-files), for each module in the run-time image.

The JMOD files are used by the`jlink`tool when creatingcustom run-time images](https://dev.java/learn/jlink/). The run-time image in a complete JDK is itself such an image, created from these JMOD files via`jlink`. Thus every class file, native library, configuration file, and other resource in the run-time image is also present in one of these JMOD files — arguably a massive waste of space.

In fact, the JMOD files in a complete JDK account for about 25% of the JDK's total size. If we could enhance the`jlink`tool to extract class files, native libraries, configuration files, and other resources from the run-time image itself then we could dramatically reduce the size of the installed JDK by omitting the JMOD files.

## Description

The new JDKbuild-time](https://openjdk.org/groups/build/doc/building.html)configuration option`--enable-linkable-runtime`builds a JDK whose`jlink`tool can create run-time images without using the JDK's JMOD files. The resulting JDK does not include those files, i.e., there is no`jmods`directory. It is thus approximately 25% smaller than a JDK built with the default configuration, though it contains exactly the same modules.

```
$ configure [ ... other options ... ] --enable-linkable-runtime
$ make images
```

The`jlink`tool in any JDK build can consume both JMOD files and modular JAR files. In addition, in JDK builds with this feature enabled,`jlink`can consume modules from the run-time image of which it is part. The`--help`output of`jlink`shows whether it has this capability:

```
$ jlink --help
Usage: jlink <options> --module-path <modulepath> --add-modules <module>[,<module>...]
...
Capabilities:
      Linking from run-time image enabled
$
```

This means that the`jlink`tool in use can link JDK modules from the containing run-time image. If it did not have this capability then it would say`Linking from run-time image disabled`instead.

A version of`jlink`with the new capability always prefers to consume JDK modules from JMOD files on the module path, if available. It will consume modules from the run-time image of which it is part only if the module`java.base`is not found on the module path. Any other modules must still be specified to`jlink`via the`--module-path`option.

The user experience of running`jlink`with the new capability is exactly the same as that of running`jlink`without the capability. If we want to reduce the size of the run-time image by omitting some modules, we can continue to do so by including only the modules we require, yet JMOD files are not needed. For example, to create a run-time image that contains only the`java.xml`and`java.base`modules, the`jlink`invocation is the same:

```
$ jlink --add-modules java.xml --output image
$ image/bin/java --list-modules
java.base@24
java.xml@24
$
```

The output of`jlink`is exactly the same as if the modules were linked from JMOD files. The resulting run-time image is about 60% smaller than a full JDK run-time image.

Invocations for more complex cases are also the same. For example, suppose we want to create a run-time image containing an application module`app`which requires a library`lib`. These modules are packaged asmodular JAR files](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/23/docs/specs/jar/jar.html#modular-jar-files)in an`mlib`directory. We specify them to`jlink`via the`--module-path`option, as usual:

```
$ ls mlib
app.jar	lib.jar
$ jlink --module-path mlib --add-modules app --output app
$ app/bin/java --list-modules
app
lib
java.base@24
$
```

The`jlink`tool copies the class files and resources for the`app`and`lib`modules from the modular JAR files`app.jar`and`lib.jar`. It extracts the class files, native libraries, configuration files, and other resources for the JDK's modules from the JDK's run-time image.

The`--verbose`option of`jlink`now shows the origin of each module:

```
$ ls custom-jmods
foo.jmod
$ jlink --add-modules foo \
        --module-path=custom-jmods \
        --verbose \
        --output foo-image
Linking based on the current run-time image
java.base jrt:/java.base (run-time image)
foo file:///path/to/custom-jmods/foo.jmod

Providers:
  java.base provides java.nio.file.spi.FileSystemProvider used by java.base
$
```

Here the module`java.base`is extracted from the current run-time image, while the module`foo`is linked from the JMOD file`foo.jmod`.

### Not enabled by default

The default build configuration will remain as it is today: The resulting JDK will contain JMOD files and its`jlink`tool will not be able to operate without them. Whether the JDK build that you get from your preferred vendor contains this feature is up to that vendor.

We may propose to enable this feature by default in a future release.

### Restrictions

The`jlink`tool in a JDK built with`--enable-linkable-runtime`has a few limitations compared to that in a JDK built with the default configuration:

- 
`jlink`cannot be used to create a run-time image that itself contains the`jlink`tool. The`jlink`tool is in the`jdk.jlink`module, so this fails:

```
$ jlink --add-modules jdk.jlink --output image
Error: This JDK does not contain packaged modules and cannot be used \
to create another run-time image that includes the jdk.jlink module
```

We may revisit this restriction in the future if it proves problematic.

- 
`jlink`fails if any user-editable configuration files are modified.

The JDK's`conf`directory contains various files that developers may edit to configure the JDK. The`conf/security/java.security`file, in particular, configures security providers, cryptographic algorithms, and so forth. In a default build,`jlink`copies the user-editable configuration files for the JDK's modules from the JDK's JMOD files. Without JMOD files,`jlink`copies the configuration files from the run-time image, and fails if any of the files differ from the original files:

```
$ jlink --add-modules java.xml --output image
Error: [...]/bin/conf/security/java.security has been modified
```

This restriction prevents`jlink`from creating a run-time image with an ad-hoc or insecure configuration. If the security configuration was changed to, e.g., enable an obsolete message-digest algorithm that is disabled by default, then it would be inappropriate to copy that configuration to the new run-time image.

- 
Cross-linking, e.g., running`jlink`on Linux/x64 to create a run-time image for Windows/x64, is not possible.

- 
Linking from a run-time image that is itself using`--patch-module`is not supported.

- 
Linking by extracting modules from a different run-time image, e.g., by specifying that image to the`--module-path`option, is not supported.

## Alternatives

A JDK vendor could provide a JDK's JMOD files as a separate download. Some Linux distributions already do essentially this, by providing one installation package for the JDK run-time image and another for the corresponding JMOD files.

This approach is brittle, since if the second package is not installed then the`jlink`tool will not work. This approach is, furthermore, not well-suited to cloud environments in which a JDK run-time image and its JMOD files might wind up in different and conflicting container-image layers.