JEP 211: Elide Deprecation Warnings on Import Statements
======================================================================

| Author | Joseph D. Darcy | 
| Owner | Joe Darcy | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | SE | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 9 | 
| Component | tools / javac | 
| Discussion | compiler dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | S | 
| Duration | M | 
| Reviewed by | Brian Goetz | 
| Endorsed by | Brian Goetz | 
| Created | 2014/05/07 00:45 | 
| Updated | 2025/02/25 15:08 | 
| Issue | 8042566](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8042566) | 

## Summary

As of Java SE 8, java compilers are required by reasonable interpretations of the Java Language Specification to issue deprecation warnings when a deprecated type is imported by name or when a deprecated member (method, field, nested type) is imported statically. These warnings are uninformative and should not be required. Deprecation warnings at actual uses of deprecated members should remain.

## Goals

The goal of this JEP is to facilitate making large code bases clean of lint warnings. The deprecation warnings on imports cannot be suppressed using the`@SuppressWarnings`annotation, unlike uses of deprecated members in code. In large code bases like that of the JDK, deprecated functionality must often be supported for some time and merely importing a deprecated construct does not justify a warning message if all the uses of the deprecated construct are intentional and suppressed.

## Non-Goals

It is not a goal of this JEP to actually resolve all the deprecation warnings in the JDK code case. However, that might occur as part of a separate maintenance effort in JDK 9.

## Description

From a specification perspective, the needed change is small. In JLS 8 the section on`@Deprecated`states:

A Java compiler must produce a deprecation warning when a type, method, field, or constructor whose declaration is annotated with`@Deprecated`is used (overridden, invoked, or referenced by name) in a construct which is explicitly or implicitly declared, unless:

- The use is within an entity that is itself annotated with the annotation`@Deprecated`; or
- The use is within an entity that is annotated to suppress the warning with the annotation`@SuppressWarnings("deprecation")`; or
- The use and declaration are both within the same outermost class.

The specification change would be something like adding another bullet stating the additional exclusion:

- The use is within an`import`statement.

In the`javac`reference implementation, there would be a simple check to skip over import statements when looking for deprecation warnings.

## Testing

Normal unit tests should suffice to test this feature. A handful of JCK tests may need to be updated for the changed specification.