JEP 153: Launch JavaFX Applications
======================================================================

| Owner | Kumar Srinivasan | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | JDK | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 8 | 
| Component | client-libs | 
| Discussion | core dash libs dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | S | 
| Duration | S | 
| Endorsed by | Brian Goetz | 
| Created | 2011/10/27 20:00 | 
| Updated | 2025/06/18 03:10 | 
| Issue | 8046143](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8046143) | 

## Summary

Enhance the`java`command-line launcher to launch JavaFX applications.

## Goals

In addition to supporting the launching of Java classes through their`main`methods, and of executable JARs through their`Main-Class`manifest headers, the`java`launcher should also support the direct launching of JavaFX application JARs.

## Non-Goals

The feature will not enhance the launcher to:

- Download any components from the network,
- Replace existing RIA deployment tools, or
- Launch modularized JavaFX applications.

## Success Metrics

This feature should not adversely affect the startup performance of non-JavaFX applications and tools.

## Motivation

JavaFX applications are currently launched via the`java`launcher by bundling the JavaFX initialization logic as the main class in the application's JAR file. In the event that this logic is erroneous, having the initialization logic embedded in the deployed JARs makes it difficult to distribute fixes without redistributing all applications. By moving the initialization logic into the`java`launcher itself, this problem can be eliminated.

## Description

Mark JavaFX application JARs so that the launcher can recognize them and then use JavaFX-specific logic to launch them. One way to do this would be to define a new JAR-manifest header.

## Testing

Existing startup performance tests will be run.

## Dependences

This feature depends on upon JavaFX being integrated into the JDK.