JEP 282: jlink: The Java Linker
======================================================================

| Author | Jean-Francois Denise | 
| Owner | Jim Laskey | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | JDK | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 9 | 
| Component | tools / jlink | 
| Discussion | jigsaw dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | L | 
| Duration | L | 
| Depends | JEP 261: Module System](261) | 
| Relates to | JEP 220: Modular Run-Time Images](220) | 
|  | JEP 275: Modular Java Application Packaging](275) | 
| Reviewed by | Alan Bateman, Alex Buckley, Iris Clark, Jim Laskey, Mandy Chung, Mark Reinhold | 
| Endorsed by | Brian Goetz | 
| Created | 2015/07/16 12:55 | 
| Updated | 2017/05/19 02:01 | 
| Issue | 8131679](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8131679) | 

## Summary

Create a tool that can assemble and optimize a set of modules and their dependencies into a custom run-time image as defined inJEP 220](http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/220).

## Non Goals

This JEP does not commit the resulting tool to generate anything other than a modular run-time image.

It is not a goal of this JEP to define a standard or supported API for plugins. Instead, the plugin API will be**strictly experimental**. A future JEP may re-visit this topic once experience has been obtained using the plugin API defined by this JEP.

## Motivation

JEP 261](http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/261)defines*link time*as an optional phase between the phases of compile time (the`javac`command) and run-time (the`java`run-time launcher). Link time requires a linking tool that will assemble and optimize a set of modules and their transitive dependencies to create a run-time image or executable.

Link time is an opportunity to do*whole-world*optimizations that are otherwise difficult at compile time or costly at run-time. An example would be to optimize a computation when all its inputs become constant (i.e., not unknown). A follow-up optimization would be to remove code that is no longer reachable.

## Description

A basic invocation of the linker tool,`jlink`, is:

```
$ jlink --module-path <modulepath> --add-modules <modules> --limit-modules <modules> --output <path>
```

where:

- 
`--module-path`is the path where observable modules will be discovered by the linker; these can be modular JAR files, JMOD files, or exploded modules

- 
`--add-modules`names the modules to add to the run-time image; these modules can, via transitive dependencies, cause additional modules to be added

- 
`--limit-modules`limits the universe of observable modules

- 
`--output`is the directory that will contain the resulting run-time image

The`--module-path`,`--add-modules`, and`--limit-modules`options are described in further detail inJEP 261](http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/261).

Other options that`jlink`will support include:

- `--help`to print a usage/help message
- `--version`to print version information

## Alternatives

The alternative to a linking tool is to use platform-specific JDK and JRE image-build scripts. This approach would make it difficult to create custom run-time images.

## Testing

Beyond the expected set of unit tests to exercise the tool I, the JDK build will regularly exercise`jlink`by creating the JDK and JRE run-time images.

## Risks and Assumptions

The set of requirements for the tool is not complete at this time. The tool's extensibility is expected to evolve.

## Dependences

- 
This JEP depends on the module system that will be specified byJSR 376 (Java Platform Module System)](http://openjdk.java.net/projects/jigsaw/spec)and implemented byJEP 261: Module System](http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/261).

- 
The initial implementation ofJEP 220](http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/220)in JDK 9 uses a custom build-time tool to construct JRE and JDK images. That tool will be replaced by`jlink`.