JEP 317: Experimental Java-Based JIT Compiler
======================================================================

| Owner | Igor Veresov | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | JDK | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 10 | 
| Component | hotspot / compiler | 
| Discussion | hotspot dash compiler dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | M | 
| Duration | M | 
| Reviewed by | John Rose, Mikael Vidstedt, Vladimir Kozlov | 
| Endorsed by | Vladimir Kozlov | 
| Created | 2017/10/20 20:03 | 
| Updated | 2018/03/28 01:58 | 
| Issue | 8189751](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8189751) | 

## Summary

Enable the Java-based JIT compiler, Graal, to be used as an experimental JIT compiler on the Linux/x64 platform.

## Non-Goals

It is not a goal to meet or beat the performance of the existing JIT compilers.

## Motivation

Graal, a Java-based JIT compiler, is the basis of the experimental Ahead-of-Time (AOT) compiler introduced in JDK 9. Enabling it to be used as an experimental JIT compiler is one of the initiatives ofProject Metropolis](http://mail.openjdk.java.net/pipermail/announce/2017-September/000233.html), and is the next step in investigating the feasibility of a Java-based JIT for the JDK.

## Description

Enable Graal to be used as an experimental JIT compiler, starting with the Linux/x64 platform. Graal will use the JVM compiler interface (JVMCI) introduced in JDK 9. Graal is already in the JDK, so enabling it as an experimental JIT will primarily be a testing and debugging effort.

To enable Graal as the JIT compiler, use the following options on the`java`command line:

```
-XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+UseJVMCICompiler
```

## Testing

Standard testing for compilers is planned for this work. This includes running all HotSpot and JDK tests with various flag options on Linux/x64. In addition to these standard tests, unit tests developed specifically for Graal will be run. Support to run these unit tests in the`jtreg`framework will be implemented. Initial performance testing and benchmarking will be performed as part of this effort.

## Risks and Assumptions

Issues with slower startup performance and increased Java heap usage of this experimental offering could impact and/or limit initial developer evaluation. Some applications and benchmarks will see performance gaps in Graal compared with the existing HotSpot JIT compilers.