JEP 479: Remove the Windows 32-bit x86 Port
======================================================================

| Author | George Adams & Saint Wesonga | 
| Owner | George Adams | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | Implementation | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 24 | 
| Component | hotspot / other | 
| Discussion | jdk dash dev at openjdk dot org | 
| Effort | S | 
| Duration | S | 
| Relates to | JEP 449: Deprecate the Windows 32-bit x86 Port for Removal](449) | 
|  | JEP 501: Deprecate the 32-bit x86 Port for Removal](501) | 
| Reviewed by | Magnus Ihse Bursie, Vladimir Kozlov | 
| Endorsed by | Vladimir Kozlov | 
| Created | 2024/04/19 07:33 | 
| Updated | 2025/02/20 09:54 | 
| Issue | 8330623](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8330623) | 

## Summary

Remove the source code and build support for the Windows 32-bit x86 port. This port wasdeprecated for removal in JDK 21](https://openjdk.org/jeps/449)with the express intent to remove it in a future release.

## Goals

- 
Remove all code paths that apply only to Windows 32-bit x86.

- 
Cease all testing and development efforts targeting the Windows 32-bit x86 platform.

- 
Simplify the JDK's build and test infrastructure.

## Non-Goals

- 
It is not a goal to remove or change 32-bit support for any platforms other than Windows.

- 
It is not a goal to remove either code or support for Windows 32-bit in previous releases.

## Motivation

- 
Allow contributors in the OpenJDK Community to accelerate the development of new features and enhancements that will move the platform forward.

- 
The implementation ofJEP 436 (Virtual Threads)](https://openjdk.org/jeps/436)for Windows x86-32 falls back to the use of kernel threads and therefore does not bring the expected benefits of Project Loom.

- 
Windows 10, the last Windows operating system to support 32-bit operation, will reach End of Life inOctober 2025](https://learn.microsoft.com/lifecycle/products/windows-10-home-and-pro).

## Description

- 
Find and remove all code paths in the code base that apply only to Windows 32-bit.

- 
Modify the JDK build system to remove support for compiling on Windows 32-bit platforms, and halt testing activities for this architecture.

- 
Update the JDK documentation to reflect the removal of Windows 32-bit support, and publicize this change so as to ensure a smooth transition for users and developers.

## Risks and Assumptions

Some users may still rely on 32-bit Java applications on Windows. This change requires Java applications running on 32-bit Windows to migrate to a 64-bit JDK and Windows environment, or else remain on legacy versions of the JDK, prior to JDK 23, which still include 32-bit support. Transition guidance and support by distributions and vendors of JDK binaries will be critical.