JEP 212: Resolve Lint and Doclint Warnings
======================================================================

| Author | Joseph D. Darcy | 
| Owner | Joe Darcy | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | JDK | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 9 | 
| Component | tools | 
| Discussion | jdk9 dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | M | 
| Duration | L | 
| Reviewed by | Brian Goetz | 
| Endorsed by | Brian Goetz | 
| Created | 2014/05/09 21:55 | 
| Updated | 2024/02/05 20:31 | 
| Issue | 8042878](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8042878) | 

## Summary

The JDK code base contains numerous lint and doclint errors as reported by`javac`. These warnings should be resolved, at least for the fundamental parts of the platform.

## Goals

Operationally, the goal is to have at least the packages for the fundamental packages in the platform (those discussed on core-libs, awt-dev, swing-dev, 2d-dev, etc.) compile cleanly under`javac`'s lint and doclint warnings. It is desirable for other packages, such as those comprising JAXP, JAX-WS, and CORBA to also compile cleanly with all warnings enabled.

## Success Metrics

A successful build of the sources in question when the`-Xlint:all`option is used for the`javac`command. A slightly weaker goal that may be acceptable is for all the source-related lint options to be enabled, but not the lint options for non-source properties. For example, some lint options concern properties of the javac command line rather than the sources being compiled.

## Description

This JEP proposes to complete efforts to fix warnings that have beenunderway in JDK 8 and JDK 9](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/issues/?jql=project%20=%20jdk%20and%20fixVersion%20in%20(8,%209)%20and%20status%20=%20Resolved%20and%20resolution%20=%20fixed%20and%20labels%20in%20(lint,%20doclint))as well as to formalize a subset of source-code improvementspreviously proposed to jdk9-dev](http://mail.openjdk.java.net/pipermail/jdk9-dev/2013-December/000141.html). Most of the warnings are resolved by modifying the interior of method bodies. Resolving some of rawtypes warnings involves changing method signatures, such as changing a parameter type from a raw`java.lang.Class`to a`java.lang.Class<?>`or some more specific type. Any API changes will stay within thegeneral evolution policy](http://cr.openjdk.java.net/~darcy/OpenJdkDevGuide/OpenJdkDevelopersGuide.v0.777.html#general_evolution_policy)of the JDK.

## Testing

A successful compile / build is the primary test for most changes, but the existing regression tests should continue to pass. Where a Java SE API has a signature change, the corresponding JCK signature test will need to be updated accordingly.

## Dependences

Resolving the deprecation warnings in the JDK would be easedif importing a deprecated type does not trigger a deprecation warning](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8042566).