JEP 266: More Concurrency Updates
======================================================================

| Owner | Doug Lea | 
| Type | Feature | 
| Scope | SE | 
| Status | Closed / Delivered | 
| Release | 9 | 
| Component | core-libs / java.util.concurrent | 
| Discussion | core dash libs dash dev at openjdk dot java dot net | 
| Effort | S | 
| Duration | S | 
| Relates to | JEP 193: Variable Handles](193) | 
| Reviewed by | Chris Hegarty, Martin Buchholz, Paul Sandoz | 
| Endorsed by | Brian Goetz | 
| Created | 2015/08/04 11:01 | 
| Updated | 2017/04/24 23:02 | 
| Issue | 8132960](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8132960) | 

## Summary

An interoperable publish-subscribe framework, enhancements to the`CompletableFuture`API, and various other improvements.

## Motivation

The continual evolution of uses of concurrency and parallelism in applications requires continual evolution in library support.

## Description

- 
Interfaces supporting the Reactive Streams publish-subscribe framework, nested within the new class`Flow`.`Publisher`s produce items consumed by one or more`Subscriber`s, each managed by a`Subscription`. Communication relies on a simple form of flow control (method`Subscription.request`, for communicating back pressure) that can be used to avoid resource management problems that may otherwise occur in "push" based systems. A utility class`SubmissionPublisher`is provided that developers can use to create custom components.
These (very small) interfaces correspond to those defined with broad participation (from theReactive Streams](http://www.reactive-streams.org/)initiative) and support interoperability across a number of async systems running on JVMs. Nesting the interfaces within a class is a conservative policy allowing their use across various short-term and long-term possibilities. There are no plans to provide network- or I/O-based`java.util.concurrent`components for distributed messaging, but it is possible that future JDK releases will include such APIs in other packages.

- 
Enhancements to the`CompletableFuture`API

  - Time-based enhancements are added that enable a future to complete with a value or exceptionally after a certain duration, see methods`orTimeout`and`completeTimeout`. In addition, a complementary`Executor`returned by the static methods named`delayedExecutor`allow a task to execute after a certain duration. This may be combined with`Executor`receiving methods on`CompletableFuture`to support operations with time-delays.
  - Subclass enhancements are added making it easier to extend from`CompletableFuture`, such as to provide a subclass that supports an alternative default executor.

- 
Numerous implementation improvements accumulated since JDK 8; many of them are small, but some include Javadoc spec rewordings.

## Testing

The continuing set of JSR 166 EG members provide functionality, TCK, and performance tests for all components.

## Risks and Assumptions

Care will be taken to ensure any small but required differences in code between the JDK 9 repository and the 166 repository are retained.